Let's move on to storing and accessing PHI data.
Technically, is not required under the Security Rule to encrypt,
but it is considered a best practice to do so,
and you have to show a good reason why not to use encryption.
Therefore, you should encrypt data at rest,
create a secure transmission of data with a VPN and
ensure that data is unusable in the case the device is lost or stolen.
First, make sure that your cloud provider is HIPAA compliant.
HIPAA does not certify a cloud provider.
There are certain cloud providers,
they have followed HIPAA standards to be compliant.
It's important that you use only HIPAA BAA approved cloud services.
This means that you might not be able to use the latest and
greatest cloud services in some cases because approval can take some time,
due to a need to encrypt data across different parts of the process.
An important role that is part of
the HIPAA Privacy Rule is the minimum necessary standard,
which states that covered entities must limit
PHI access to the minimum level necessary to achieve an objective.
What this practically means is that there is
greater legal oversight for different uses of PHI data.
In a very limited latitude on how to use
the data in terms of practical day-to-day impact,
this can mean that you might have anticipated delays if you
seek to add fields or have a need to re-identify fields.
For example, you may want to do a patient-level aggregation and need to filter out
and encounter level certain record but need identifiable information.
This can cause delays or might not even
make the modeling possible depending on the situation.
Well, I do not recommend you certify the dataset as
de-identified without consulting your legal and compliance teams.
I do want to share a little bit about what it is and why do it.
De-identifying a dataset refers to the removal of identifying fields like name,
address from a dataset.
While this might sound simple,
it can be more complex and have some legal risk.
So why would you do this?
You would hopefully reduce privacy risk to the individual
in the dataset and support secondary usage.
HIPAA has two ways that you can use to de-identify a dataset.
The first method is the expert determination method.
This is done by a statistician that determines there
is a small risk that an individual could be identified.
The second method is called safe harbor,
and it refers to the removal of 18 identifiers like name,
zip code , etc.
This information is provided to expose you to these methods.
I would still recommend that you work with
your organization's compliance experts to determine when and which method is appropriate.
Re-identification is a legal risk that you would not want to
subject your organization to and it is best to work with your team on this.